[draft] Understanding Fine-Grained Reactivity (#325)
solidjs/solid-docs-next: content/guides/fine-grained-reactivity.mdx

# Understanding Fine-Grained Reactivity

Reactivity ensures automatic responses to data changes, eliminating the need for manual updates to the user interface (UI). 
By connecting UI elements to the underlying data, updates become automated.

> In a fine-grained reactive system an application will now have the ability to make highly *targeted and specific* updates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a fine-grained reactive system, an application will now have the ability to make highly *targeted and specific* updates.
```

An example of this can be seen in the contrast between Solid and [React](https://react.dev/).
In Solid, updates are made to the targeted attribute that needs to be changed, avoiding broader and, sometimes unnecessary, updates.
In contrast, React would re-execute an entire component for a change in the single attribute, which can be less efficient.

Because of the fine-grained reactive system, unnecessary recalculations are avoided.

> Through targeting only the areas of an application that have changed the user experieince becomes smoother and more optimized.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Through targeting only the areas of an application that have changed the user experience becomes smoother and more optimized.
```

> **Note:** If you're new to the concept of reactivity and want to learn the basics, consider starting with our [intro to reactivity guide](/essentials/intro-to-reactivity).

Reviewer: >intro to reactivity

I would capitalize this since it's the name of a document.

```

Here, `count` serves as the getter, and `setCount` functions as the setter.

### Effects

[Effects](/essentials/effects) are functions that are triggered when the signals they depend on point to a different value.

```js=
import { createSignal, createEffect } from "solid-js";

const [count, setCount] = createSignal(0);

createEffect(() => {
  console.log(count());
});
```

The effect takes a function that is called whenever *any* of the signals it relies on changes, such as `count` in this example.

## Building a reactive system

To grasp the concept of reactivity, it is often helpful to construct a reactive system from scratch. 

The following example will follow the observer pattern, where data entities (signals) will maintain a list of their subscribers (effects). 
This is a way to notify subscribers whenever a signal they changes.

Here is a basic code outline to begin:

```jsx
function createSignal() {}

function createEffect() {}

const [count, setCount] = createSignal(0);

createEffect(() => {
  console.log("The count is " + count());
});
```

## Reactive primitives

### `createSignal`

The `createSignal` function performs two main tasks:

> 1. Initialize the value (in this case, `count` is set to `0`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Initializes the value (in this case, `count` is set to `0`).
```

> 2. Return an array with two elements: the getter and setter function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Returns an array with two elements: the getter and setter function.
```

      subscribers.add(currentSubscriber);
    }
    return value;
  }
  
  function setter(newValue) {
    if (value === newValue) return; // if the new value is not different, do not notify dependent effects and memos
    value = newValue;
    for (const subscriber of subscribers) {
      subscriber(); // 
    }
  }
  
  return [getter, setter];
}

// creating an effect
function createEffect(fn) {
  const previousSubscriber = currentSubscriber; // Step 1
  currentSubscriber = fn;
  fn();
  currentSubscriber = previousSubscriber;
}

//.. 
```

A variable is used to hold a reference to the current executing subscriber function.
This is used to determine which effects are dependent on which signals.

Inside `createSignal`, the initial value is stored and a [Set](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Set) is used to store any subscriber functions that are dependent on the signal.
This function will then return two functions for the signal:
* The `getter` function checks to see if the current subscriber function is being accessed and, if it is, adds it to the list of subscribers before returning the *current* value of the signal.

> * The `setter` function evaluated the new value against the old value, notifying the dependent functions only when the signal has been updated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The `setter` function evaluates the new value against the old value, notifying the dependent functions only when the signal has been updated.
```

When creating the `createEffect` function, a reference to any previous subscribers is intiailized to handle any possible nested effects present.
The current subscriber is then passed to the given function, which is run immediately.
During this run, if the effect accesses any signals it is then registered as a subscriber to those signals.

> The current subscriber, once the given function has been run, will be reset to its previous value so that, if there are any nested effects, they are operated correctly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The current subscriber, once the given function runs, will be reset to its previous value so that, if there are any nested effects, they are operated correctly.
```

### Validating the reactive system

To validate the system, increment the `count` value at one-second intervals:

```jsx
//..

const [count, setCount] = createSignal(0);

createEffect(() => {
  console.log("The count is " + count());
});

setInterval(() => {
  setCount(count() + 1);
}, 1000);

```

This will display the incremented count value on the console at one-second intervals to confirm the reactive system's functionality.

## Managing lifecycles in a reactive system

> In reactive systems, various elements, often referred to as "nodes", are interconnected. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In reactive systems, various elements, often referred to as "nodes," are interconnected. 
```

### Synchronous nature of effect tracking

The reactivity system described above operates synchronously. 
This operation has implications for how effects and their dependencies are tracked. 
Specifically, the system registers the subscriber, runs the effect function, and then unregisters the subscriber — all in a linear, synchronous sequence.

Consider the following example:

```jsx
createEffect(() => {
  setTimeout(() => {
    console.log(count());
  }, 1000);
});
```

The `createEffect` function in this example, initiates a `setTimeout` to delay the console log. 
Because the system is synchronous, it doesn't wait for this operation to complete. 
By the time the `count` getter is triggered within the `setTimeout`, the global scope no longer has a registered subscriber.
As a result, this `count` signal will not add the callback as a subscriber which leads to potential issues with tracking the changes to `count`.

### Handling asynchronous effects

While the basic reactivity system is synchronous, frameworks like Solid offer more advanced features to handle asynchronous scenarios. 
For example, the `on` function provides a way to manually specify the dependencies of an effect. 

> This is particularly useful for to make sure asynchronous operations are correctly tied into the reactive system. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is particularly useful for you to make sure that asynchronous operations are correctly tied into the reactive system.
```

Solid also introduces the concept of resources for managing asynchronous operations. 
Resources are specialized reactive primitives that convert the asynchronicity of operations like network requests into synchronicity, embedding the results within a signal. 

> The system can then track asynchronous operations and their state, keeping the UI up-to-date when the operation completes or its' state changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The system can then track asynchronous operations and their state, keeping the UI up-to-date when the operation completes or its state changes.
```
